# saberseminar23
Choosing the correct time to take a starting pitcher out in favor of a reliever is one of the most important in-game decisions a manager has to make. Traditionally, managers have relied on their experience and intuition to make these decisions. However, developments in advanced analytics and increased emphasis on player health have sparked curiosity about the potential for determining the optimal game state to take any specific starter out. As the only player to surely touch the ball every play, predicting a pitcher’s performance is arguably the most reliable method of control over the field for coaching staffs. This research aims to investigate the game characteristics that most impact a pitcher’s evolution through a single game and predict when they are most likely to jeopardize the outcome of the game, using a comprehensive analysis of MLB plate appearance data from the 2015-2018 seasons. By determining the factors for any pitcher that contribute the most to their deterioration on the mound, coaches can have more confidence in their decisions when the game is on the line.
Using mixed effect modeling on a dataset of plate appearances to account for performance trends by individual pitchers, we wish to predict whether the next at bat would be in better hands with the starting pitcher or some alternative reliever based on the change in expected runs either pitcher would generate. For example, the model could be specified to relievers of a certain team, relievers with specific performance metrics, or a single player. The findings of this research will contribute to the ongoing discourse on game strategy and player management in professional baseball. By providing a comprehensive analysis of the effects of pitcher replacement, we aim to inform managers, coaches, and decision-makers within MLB organizations on the potential benefits and trade-offs associated with altering conventional pitching practices. The factor that contributes most significantly to the decline of a pitcher’s performance is pitch count, but the mixed-effects modeling allows for pitcher-specific analysis of which game factors have the strongest impact.
Previous work has used recursive feature elimination and random forest modeling to produce a binary recommendation to replace or leave a pitcher in based on the current game state and upcoming batter. The mixed effect modeling of this proposal instead allows for pitcher-specific variations of the model and returns the predicted next change in run expectancy. The previous model does not account for changes in run expectancy at all, only historically what has happened when pitchers were left in or replaced. By predicting the change in run expectancy of the next at bat rather than a binary recommendation, managers have more room to rely on their instincts as they have done traditionally.
